# Features of unix os

- multi user sys

- multi tasking
- building block approadch ls | wc
- tookit
  compilers
  interpreters
  sys admin utilities - fsck, mount
- pattern matching
  metachars - \* ?
  support for regular expressions
- Programming facility
  shell scripts
- Documentation
  man command

POSIX :- Portable OS interface for Comp Env
SUSV3 :- Single unix specification V3, 2001 (write once and adopt anywhere)

Once software has been developed on any POSIX compliant UNIX system, it can be easily ported to another posix compliant unix system with minimum modifications
POSIX was developed as required by IEEE.
POSIX refers to OS in general, but it was based on UNIX.

1. POSIX.1
   specifies C appln prg interface and system calls
2. POSIX .2
   deals with shell and utilities.

File name arguments

Many unix cmds use filename as arguments to the cmd can take ip from file.

ls -l x.txt y.txt
cat x.txt y.txt

## man -k , apropos and whatis

man -k searches a summary database and prints a one line description of the command
apropos - lists the commands and files associated
ctrl - c :- aborting a command in between
ctrk - d :- Ending the file editing

## to send a mail

```
mailx cse
cc:
subject: alkdjf;la
wheather is cloudy and widh is fkn fast
```

## password

- works only in super user mode

```
passwd

```

## General password framing rules

- atlease 6 characters
- combination of alphabets digits and spcl characters
- it should not resemble the user name
- change the password periodically

## Inode number

- A file or directory is associated with a name and a number is called as inode number.
- when a directory is created and entry comprising these 2 parameters. name and inode no is made in the files parent directory.
  Each entry is removed, when the directory is removed. Same holds good for ordinary files also.
  ```
    ls -i is used to get inode no
  ```

## cat -n

- -n is called a switch it gives line no

## cp -i

- interactive copying

```
cp: overwrite (y/n): y
```

- -i intereactive copying
  cp overwrite y/n
- -r copying directory structure recursively subforlders are also copies

## rm options

- rm \* - remove all files
  -i intereactive deleteion
  -f - forced reemoval
  -r or -R - recursive removal remove subfolders also

## mv options

```
mv file12 file2
mv file1 file2 file3 dir1
```

- moves file1, file2, file3 to directory dir1
- mv dir1 dir2 can be used to rename a folder

## more

```
    man cat
    man cat | more


```

## od

- od - octal dump
- cmp - comparing 2 files (files hsould be sorted)
- comm - what is common in 2 files (files shld be sorted)
- sort - to sort files
