# Advantages of using db approach

- controlling redundancy iun data storage and in development and maintenance efforts.
  - sharing of data among multiple users.
- Restricting unauthorized access to data.
- Providing persistent storage for program objects
- providing storage structures(Eg. indexes) for efficient query processing
- providing backup and recovery services.
- providing multiple interfaces to different classes of users.
- Representing complex relationships among data.
- Enforciing integrity constraints on the database.
- providing bakcup and recovery
- multiple interfaces to dfrnt classes of users
- complex relationships among data
- enforcing integrity constraints on the db.

# Additional implications of using the db approach

## Potential for enforcing standards

    - Thgis is very crucial for the success of db applications in large organizations. Standards refer to data item names, display formats, screens, report structures, meta-data (description of data), terminology, etc.

## Reduced application development time

    - Incremental time to add each new application is reduced.

## Flexibility to change data structures

    - Database structure may evolve as new requirements are defined

# When not to use dbms

## #Main inhibitors(costs) of using a dbms

- High initial investment and possible need for additional hardware.
- Overhead for providing generality, security, concurrency control, recovery, and integrity functions.

## when dbms may be unnecessary

- application simple, well defined and not expected to change
- if user data is not maintained

# Important questions

## Chapter 1

1. Define db sys and list the properties for database system
2. Define dbms and functionalities of dbms
3. define database, database system, database management system
4. University cass study
5. Descuss main characteristics of database approach
6. Describe different Database users
7. Advantages of using the databse approach over tradidtional file processing system
